A completely randomized blocks design experiment was conducted for eleven
years at Siano research station, Jableh, Latakia, Syria in order to select a new
rootstock for satsuma (Citrus unshiu Marc.) cv. ‘St-Jean’ plantations. Sour
orange, Citrumelo 1452, Citrumelo 4475, Rangpur lime, Carrizo citrange,
Troyer citrange, Trifoliate orange “Robidoux” and Volkamer lemon were used
as rootstocks. Yield (kg/tree), trunk cross-sectional area (cm2) above and
below grafting area, fruit weight (g), peel thickness (mm), juice content (%),
titratable acidity (TA%), and total soluble solids (TSS%) were estimated.
Depending on trunk cross-sectional areas, morphological compatibility was
high between Satsuma and Rangpur lime, Sour orange, and Volkamer lemon,
while it was low with Citrumelo 1452, 4475, and Trifoliate orange. Trees
budded onto Sour orange gave the highest canopy volume, while trees buddied
onto Trifoliate orange gave the lowest. On average, Satsuma buddied onto
Citrumelo 1452 gave the highest yield (174 kg/tree), followed by those buddied
onto Troyer citrange (167 kg/tree), Citrumelo 4475 (165 kg/tree), Volkamer
lemon (163 kg/tree), and Sour orange (152 kg/tree) without significant
variation among them. Canopy efficiency (kg/m3) was higher in trees buddied
onto Trifoliate orange, while it was lower in those grafted on Sour orange. Mean
fruit weight was close among all treatments, However, it was the lowest using
Sour orange and Carrizo citrange, while no significant variations were found
regarding peel thickness or juice content. No significant variations were found
in TSS% between Citrumelo 4475, 1452, Carrizo, Troyer citrange, or Sour
orange, while TSS% decreased significantly using Rangpur, Trifoliate, and
Volkamer lemon rootstocks. Additionally, fruit titratable acidity and maturity
index (TSS/TA) were not influenced by rootstock type. Due to its superiority in
many of the studied characteristics, Citrumelo 1452 can be suggested as a
suitable rootstock for satsuma in the studied area and areas with similar
conditions as an alternative to Sour orange